JAKE: Hey, Surma.
SURMA: Hey, Jake.
JAKE: Do you like video?
SURMA: Yeah.
JAKE: Say no.
SURMA: No.
JAKE: Well, then,
did you know that we
do a podcast which is like
this, but without the video
and with more sound?
It has bonus material and
you can put it in your ears.
SURMA: Look at the
description for the link.
So.
JAKE: So.
SURMA: So, I thought I
would bring something up.
I had a couple of people
ask me at the conference
I've been recently, because
they asked me, like,
what's your background.
Like how did you end up
in doing what you do?
JAKE: I get emails like
this as well, saying,
how did you get where you are?
SURMA: And the answer
is usually dumb luck.
JAKE: Yes.
And that is always how I reply.
And I think this is
a tweet that I've
mentioned on either the video
series or the podcast before.
We do a podcast.
There'll be a link.
And my answer is
always, well, it's
like telling people the numbers
I used to win the lottery.
And I'm not convinced--
SURMA: This might not be
helpful to you at all.
JAKE: Yes.
So I guess what we're going
to talk about our backgrounds
and how we got where we were.
SURMA: I have no shame.
JAKE: Well, yeah.
And if you thought previous
episodes of HTTP203
were entirely self-indulgent,
you ain't seen nothing yet.
This is the big one.
SURMA: I was born.
JAKE: Yes, OK.
This is going to
be a long episode.
SURMA: No.
I think from
looking at our team,
I'm more on the traditional
side of how I end up here.
I studoed computer
sciences, did my bachelors,
started a masters.
JAKE: Wait.
Wait.
So you did computer science
before your bachelor's?
Or what?
SURMA: Yeah.
I had interests.
I did the odd language
here and there.
JAKE: And that was
at high school?
Like, formally or
just on your own.
SURMA: No, like self taught.
Because it was not useful.
The computer science class
or computer class that we had
were not useful to me.
And I already--
JAKE: Well, you did
have computer classes.
SURMA: We did.
JAKE: Right.
I feel like I'm having to
really dig for this information.
SURMA: That's not what
I wanted to talk about.
JAKE: Oh, sorry.
OK.
What do you want to talk about?
You just talk what you
want to talk about.
I'll sit back.
And you let me know when I'm
allowed to come in and ask
you some questions.
SURMA: Well, I thought I'm
more traditional because I did,
in fact, actually study
computer sciences,
which I know of people on
our team actually did not.
Or I know a couple of
people also who did not.
You are one example.
Because you did not study.
You studied--
JAKE: Multimedia.
SURMA: Oh, that's very--
JAKE: What could be
better than media?
Oh, multimedia.
SURMA: It's like
multivitamin juice.
JAKE: I want vitamin juice
or multivitamin juice.
That's what I'm going for.
SURMA: Yeah.
And you still ended
up here, regrettably.
JAKE: That is, I think
that goes back to what
we're saying about dumb luck.
So many people, like I work
here at Google that sort of
prides itself with like
hiring the best people.
I'm like--
SURMA: I'm not.
JAKE: And I'm sitting
alongside people
who went to prestigious
universities,
like Oxford, Cambridge types.
And that does make me
feel like it's the--
oh, what do you call it?
SURMA: Imposter syndrome.
JAKE: Imposter syndrome,
it gets that going.
But then on the other
side, I'm like ha.
You had to do a hard
university course.
And I cheated.
I got here somehow.
SURMA: That's pretty much what
I think is worth pointing out,
that especially web developments
or a lot of software
engineering is so
internet-centric that you can
find anything you want on the
internet and teach yourself,
if you want to.
Like the formal
degrees are good.
I don't want to say that
studying computer sciences
wasn't useful.
Like, I learned things.
Definitely.
Things that I'm not necessarily
using nowadays in the web job
that I have.
JAKE: Are you sure?
SURMA: Not often.
There's some things I am using.
JAKE: So when we--
I think we talked
about it before,
that you're much better at
the low level stuff than I am.
And I put that down to like
you did a lower level course,
that you did a course like what
compilers were involved in.
And I did a course that
had VRML and Adobe Director
or it was Macromedia at the
time, I guess, and Flash.
Like my course was
predominantly Flash.
SURMA: I mean, yeah.
I did have a course
on compilers.
But I think I know more low
level stuff because that's
what my first job was about.
JAKE: Why did you pick to do a
computer science degree then?
What was your--
SURMA: Because I
didn't know any better.
Like it seems like
the obvious choice.
I enjoyed maths.
When I said, I enjoy
computer science,
I want to do computer
science, you get people like,
do you know it's a lot of math.
And I'm like, well,
I kind of enjoy maths
so I'm OK with that.
And then I just studied
computer sciences.
And I didn't enjoy
everything in there.
Like some courses,
I did not enjoy.
They were just really
outdated or not relevant
to my interests.
JAKE: So it's interesting.
In my multimedia course, it
was the same story was true.
It was predominantly Flash but
we did have some web courses.
There were actually
courses that I--
I was always interested
in the computing side
that got you to something
visual really quickly.
So like on my Amiga,
Deluxe Paint was my thing.
I loved it, like
making animations.
I thought I was going to be
a designer because that's
what I really loved.
There's a small
problem with that.
I'm rubbish at it.
Seriously bad at it.
SURMA: Have you seen
our proc's intro?
JAKE: The proc's
intro is beautiful.
Don't mess with
the proc's intro.
Yes.
You see where things went wrong.
So when I kind of went
on to the PC and the web,
like the web was really--
I was like--
SURMA: I mean, that's
the shortest feedback
cycle you can have.
Right?
Do a thing, see a thing.
It's great.
JAKE: And I was, I
want to make that.
And then I found this
button called View Source.
When I worked with executables
or used executable in the past,
I couldn't figure
out how to get there.
SURMA: And that's what drove me.
Because when I asked,
whenever somebody said,
he is a programmer, I was like,
how do I make you exe files.
That drove me.
Because I wanted to understand.
Because what I did, I opened
the exe files in Notepad
and changed the
strings that I saw.
And sometimes it would still
run and sometimes it wouldn't.
And only later I
figured out, it only
kept working if the string
was the exact same length as
before.
JAKE: Yes.
Nice.
Yes.
So this is the thing, I guess
the difference between me
and you, is you looked
at the exe file and went,
I'm going to do that.
Whereas, I went,
I can't know this.
This is impossible.
I can do it now.
But at the time,
I was like, nope.
And then the web just
gave me the easy answer
to how this is done.
SURMA: It took
surprisingly long.
Because the people I asked
were trying to give--
I guess I was fairly young.
I must have been
like 10 or something
when I was trying to do this.
And when I had like,
how do I make exe,
and they were trying to give
me, oh, no, don't do that.
Here's programming.
Use Excel.
And I'm like, that's
not programming.
I mean, I know what
they were getting at.
It's reactive programming.
And you do formulas.
But I want the exe files.
JAKE: Yes.
I always thought for me
that it was the exe file
and screensaver, which are kind
of pretty much the same thing I
later learned, that
was like, there's
magic behind those files.
On the file editing
thing, the closest I
got to that was Grand Theft Auto
I, that we found the wav files
for the cut sequences,
which would always
be this like amazing artwork
of like some serious gangster.
And me and my friends would
just record, like, hello.
Reginald here.
I've been shooting
some people up.
But I'm done now and I'm
going to go start a cake shot.
SURMA: I think Grand Theft Auto
I was the one where I also went
in and found some .ini
files, where you can just go
in and then they're
pretty human readable.
And then it's stuff
like, debug mode.
And I was like, yes, please.
JAKE: So I think
what we're coming
to is hacking around was
really sort of the entry point.
SURMA: It seems it's always
a weird kind of passion
or interest that drives
you to just dig deeper.
Because otherwise I wouldn't
have canceled on my friends
and stayed at home to keep
working on something stupid.
JAKE: I mean, meaningful
order has gone completely
from this episode.
So I'm going to jump
back to education.
We learned how to-- one module
that we had was making website
without using Dreamweaver
or something like that,
which was actually useful.
Because I had never
tried that before.
And we also did one
module on CSS Zen Garden.
Do you know what that is?
SURMA: I've heard of it.
I don't think I've ever used it.
But I roughly know
what it's about.
JAKE: It was kind of
dawn of CSS becoming
the right way of doing things.
And it was an HTML page.
And you were only allowed
to change the CSS.
And it was essentially an art
gallery of different things
people could create by only
changing the CSS for the pages,
by Dave Shea.
And I thought it was actually
quite a modern thing for us
to do that at university.
But I met Dave Shea later on.
And I was like, we did a
module on you at university.
It was a weird moment.
But I would say it's like
a lot of the course was--
depending on the teacher--
a lot of it was out of date.
I remember a question on my
exam paper which was about CSS.
It said like, what
does this CSS do.
And it had a.active color red.
SURMA: That should be
a colon, shouldn't it?
JAKE: Should be a
colon, shouldn't it?
And so the person who marked
that must've hated me.
Because I wrote two answers.
And I was like, one
of these answers
is the answer you think.
Because I just was
so obsessed for--
SURMA: You're lookingfor a link
tag with an active class on it
or you meant to say--
JAKE: Oh, maybe you
meant to say this.
And the teacher was just like,
is it illegal to punch people?
Because I had done a bit
of web stuff on the side.
So I felt really smug.
SURMA: If you can outsmart the
professor, then that's winning.
JAKE: But for me, the most
important part of my course
was the year in industry.
It was a four year course and
in the middle, work experience.
SURMA: I didn't have.
JAKE: That's why
you're rubbish, mate.
SURMA: Well, I did that myself.
Because in my second
year, I think,
I tried to do my own
company with a couple
of other students.
JAKE: Oh, yes, you did do that.
SURMA: I did.
And that's how I got into
the whole low level stuff
where I did microprocessor
programming and hardware
engineering and all these
things from the very
basic electrical
engineering knowledge
that I had, mostly
taught from my mom who
was an electrical engineer.
JAKE: I didn't have that.
My dad played guitar.
Did he teach me guitar?
Dad, teach me guitar.
No, you're left handed.
Not stringing this up again.
Actually, he was
very supportive.
I just wasn't cool enough.
Didn't have the dexterity.
SURMA: So, yeah, that's
where I picked that up.
And my company failed miserably.
It was absolutely not a
success after two years
of working full time and
not paying myself anything.
So I do recommend--
JAKE: But did you learn from it?
SURMA: That's what I was like.
I would never do it again.
But I also would not skip it.
Because I got all my
contacts during that.
I learned so much about what I
want to do and what I'm good at
and what I'm not good at.
I'm not good at
being a CEO because I
spend all my time doing
legal and taxes and like no.
That's not what I'm good at.
JAKE: I know I'm taking this
episode in random directions
again.
Did you have to--
it's fair to say
like we were talking,
we've got a lot of luck.
There's also a lot
of people who have
had to have to overcome
a lot of stuff to make it
or to just like survive
in the industry.
Did you get anything
close to that?
Was there anything that
you had to overcome?
SURMA: I had massive,
lots of privileges
along the path that made it
very easy to end up where I am.
Considering that
my dad is a doctor
who was one of the first
doctors to adopt a computer
system for his patients instead
of having a paper file system.
And for some reason, so he had
a computer at home which was not
the norm in the mid
'90s necessarily,
I would say, like a
proper Windows 3.11.
Good times.
I mean, I wouldn't do anything
related to coding on there.
I would just sit there and not
be afraid to touch a computer
and just open up Paint and
draw because that's what I do.
But yeah, he allowed
me to use a computer.
And I bricked it more than once.
He still allowed me to
use it, despite this
being his work computer with
his patients' data on there.
And so that's obviously
a massive head start
to many other people who did
not have a computer at home
at age six or seven.
JAKE: See, I did.
So my family weren't
particularly well off.
I don't know if I'd
say we were poor.
But we weren't well-off either.
But it was definitely
when my sister
arrived that my dad went,
well, what we're going
to do about this other child.
Get him a computer.
So I got ZX Spectrum
81, a Sinclair Spectrum.
And that was kind of like--
and when I saw--
because obviously,
my dad was thinking
two things, like we'll
get the boy computer,
was also thinking we'll
get the boy a computer.
And he did a bit of
programming on that.
And I found that
almost more interesting
than the games
that came with it.
But because I tended to be
on the generation of machine
behind the kind of
people that were richer,
I sort of felt like I was
trying to get the most out
of the system.
And that led to a
lot of like hacking.
That had a lot of--
SURMA: Hashtag perfmatters.
JAKE: Perfmatters, yeah.
Right from the start.
That was it.
I was really interested
in the demo scene.
I was never really on it.
But like I was really
fascinated by like people who
are really driving computers.
SURMA: So would
you say that that's
what made you go into
programming, that you
saw your dad do a little
bit of coding there?
JAKE: Yeah.
Yeah.
SURMA: Because for
me, it was my cousin.
I was good with computers.
I knew my way around them.
I was comfortable with them.
But I didn't do programming.
And I hadn't any interest.
I didn't know what it was.
Then I saw him write a batch
script, like Windows batch
scripts, that would just
output stars and two spaces
as far fast as possible.
And so it would look like
snow falling in the terminal
because [INAUDIBLE] going down.
And I took that script
and I turned the stars
into a backslash.
And now it was rain.
And I was like, I am a hacker.
JAKE: I was the
star of my school
because I could write on the
screen, Mr. Butler has farted
one time, has farted two times,
reset, and make that go down
that go down the screen.
And everyone thought that
I was the funniest kid
in the classroom.
I coded the machine.
SURMA: You're not
that different today.
JAKE: No.
I still do that trick.
It's just the name
at the start changes.
But there was one
teacher I had at school,
he was a science teacher who,
I guess, didn't like children.
He definitely didn't
like being in the north.
Because I was doing
like computer stuff.
And I think I was
probably being annoying.
Trying to search
for the right word,
let's say annoying,
severely annoying.
And he sort of took
me aside at one point.
and he kind of went, you
think you're pretty smart.
You think you're pretty
smart at computers and stuff.
But compared to kids in
the south, you're nothing.
Yeah.
SURMA: All right.
JAKE: And so that is probably
the only time in my career
that I kind of really
like felt that.
And so when people talk about,
I guess, especially women
in the industry,
minorities who are getting
that like every day, that
moment that happened to me
is the one thing that I can
hang onto and think, god,
how that made me feel,
I would not make it.
I would not make it
if that was constant.
So it's horrible
that it happens.
And that's the
only thing I've got
that I can get some empathy.
I could just expand,
multiply that by millions.
SURMA: Yeah, pretty
much, isn't it?
So what is the bottom line?
I mean, there's so many people
that I work with, we work with,
that come from completely
different fields
and will put us in a
corner in the things
that they can do that I
hope more companies adopt
the whole you don't
need a degree to get
hired as a web engineer, or
something along those lines.
Because they're missing out
on some very, very good talent
out there.
And the other way around,
nobody should feel discouraged
from getting started
in web development
just because they
come from an orchestra
background or something.
Like it actually might
have some nice synergies
that you're not aware of yet.
JAKE: Anyone could
be a web developer,
as long as you're
extremely lucky
and are in the right
place at the right time.
That's our moral.
SURMA: That's bleak.
JAKE: I guess it's like,
don't be discouraged.
But don't also feel you have to
copy someone else's footsteps.
Because when someone tells
you, here's how I made it,
they are almost certainly
completely wrong.
They made it through some
other things, some luck.
And if anyone watching
this is trying
to make it in the
industrry, then
hope you have the same luck.
SURMA: Keep going.
JAKE: Keep going.
HTTP203 swag, it's just a button
that goes, so, so, so, so, so.
Just get like a full keyboard
with different pitches,
so, so, so, so, so, so,
so, so, so, so, so, so.